\documentclass[12pt]{article}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% VARIABLES %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% HEAD MATTER %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

%%% SET DATES %%%

\usepackage[american]{datetime2}
% \DTMsavedate{meetingdate}{}
% \DTMsavedate{minutesdate}{}

%%% LOAD REQUIRED PACKAGES %%%

\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage{enumitem} \setlist[enumerate,itemize]{noitemsep}
\usepackage{fontspec} \defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures={Common},
% Numbers=Lining
}
\setromanfont[Scale=1.0]{Adobe Caslon Pro}
\setsansfont[Scale=1.0]{Helvetica}
\setmonofont[Scale=1.0]{Courier}
\usepackage[driver=luatex,left=.8in,right=.8in,top=.8in,bottom=.8in]{geometry}
\usepackage{fancyhdr} \pagestyle{fancy}
\fancyhead{} \fancyhead[LE,RO]{Senate How-to (\the\year)}
\usepackage{sectsty}
\sectionfont{\normalsize}
\usepackage{textcase}
\usepackage{pdfpages} % for including PDF attachments

\usepackage{tocloft} % for customizing a compact table of contents 
% Customize apperance of ToC:
\setlength{\cftbeforetoctitleskip}{-1em} % remove 1em of vertical space before ToC
\setlength{\cftbeforesecskip}{0mm} % compress vertical spacing between entries
\renewcommand{\cftsecfont}{\mdseries} % change section entries from bold to regular
\renewcommand\contentsname{} % cut out the heading "Contents" before ToC
\renewcommand{\cftsecleader}{\mdseries\cftdotfill{\cftdotsep}} % add dot fill?
\renewcommand{\cftsecpagefont}{\mdseries} % change page numbers from bold to regular
\renewcommand{\cftsetpnumwidth}{0em} % less space to the left of the page numbers

% A hack to ignore "\tightlist":
\def\tightlist{}

\title{Grad Acad Aff Cmte Meeting Agenda \DTMusedate{meetingdate}}

\hypersetup{
pdftitle={Senate How-to},
pdfauthor={Christopher Eliot},
pdfkeywords={Hofstra, Senate, introduction},
pdflang={English},
}


\begin{document}
\thispagestyle{empty}

%%%%%%%%%
% TITLE %
%%%%%%%%%


\begin{center}
  \textbf{\large Senate How-to} \\ Hofstra University Senate (\the\year) 
\end{center}


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% INTRODUCTION %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\noident This is an informal introduction to Hofstra University's University
Senate, written especially to orient new senators. (This introduction
does not itself constitute official policy, but it points out where
official policies can be found.)


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% TABLE OF CONTENTS %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\begin{center}
\begin{minipage}[c]{4.25in} % Compress the ToC to width of half page-width
\tableofcontents
\end{minipage}
\end{center}



\section{Why is there a University
Senate?}\label{why-is-there-a-university-senate}

We joined the university, pretty much all of us, to work on things other
than academic policy. But we all want to do well here, and we want the
university to do well. Having a set of guidelines and rules governing
how we do things can help everyone do what they want to do here well.
Ideally, those guidelines---those \emph{policies}---set us up to teach
and learn and engage with one another happily and productively, without
onerous encumbrances. Moreover, ideally the policies are ones we can get
behind, because we or our elected representatives had a hand in crafting
them or in keeping them around.

Accordingly, Hofstra's Faculty Statute VII establishes ``a University
Senate, convened by the Faculty.'' Our senate has ``general powers of
supervision over all academic matters concerning the University as a
whole.'' And it can take up ``any other matters referred to it by the
Board of Trustees, the University President, or the Provost of the
University'' (FS VII).

\section{What are the Senate's areas of
responsibility?}\label{what-are-the-senates-areas-of-responsibility}

Besides supervising ``all academic matters concerning the University as
a whole'' and dealing with matters referred to it, the Senate is
empowered to ``review and provide recommendations on policies and
initiatives impacting academic matters.'' And, besides, it can
``generate initiatives regarding academic matters'' (FS VII 3). So, it
supervises, reviews, and initiates. And it does those things with both
academic matters and anything impacting academic matters. The result can
be policies, but also reports and other initiatives.

\section{Which policies?}\label{which-policies}

The main institutional, academic and academic-related policies the
Senate works on are in three places:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/senate/faculty-policy-series.html}{The
  Faculty Policy Series}}: The FPS sets out policies and procedures for
  faculty members. There are currently about 62 of them, numbered
  between 1 and 99. More workaday than the Statutes---less fundamental
  and structural and more procedural---they range widely in topic, from
  instructional matters like handling academic integrity violations and
  grade appeals; to research matters like conflict of interest,
  copyright, and misconduct policies; to organizational matters like the
  responsibilities of department chairs and how adjunct faculty are
  hired; to employment matters like research leave and sick leave.
\item
  \textbf{\href{https://bulletin.hofstra.edu}{The Bulletins}}: Published
  annually, the Bulletins come in several forms: Undergraduate,
  Graduate, and Law and for undergraduate main/Summer/January sessions.
  They are fully online. Besides course and program descriptions, each
  bulletin outlines academic policies in a student-oriented way. It
  tells students what they can expect from the university and what will
  be required of them.
\item
  \textbf{\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/sites/default/files/2024-04/facultystatutes.pdf}{The
  Faculty Statutes}}: These nine items (plus two more moved or
  withdrawn), numbered with Roman I to XI, represent general,
  foundational policies. They establish the university's administrative
  structure, determine who is on the Faculty and how they're appointed
  to it, specify how faculty meetings shall be conducted, and create the
  senate itself.
\end{itemize}

Much of the work of the Senate involves supervising the FPS and the
general, university-wide portions of the Bulletin. The FPS is the main
place the Senate commits new and updated procedures.

Most of the Senate's business concerns policies for the schools
\emph{other than} the Zucker School of Medicine and the Deane School of
Law. The medical school and the law school each have a representative on
the Senate, and their faculty serve in committee roles---especially on
Faculty Affairs and Planning \& Budget, where business can affect
them---but those schools enjoy autonomy for their academic policies.

Occasionally, the Senate also passes items that don't fit neatly into
the FPS or Bulletin, or even the Statutes, like a communication to the
University President or guidance to its Registrar.

\section{What about other university
policies?}\label{what-about-other-university-policies}

An area Hofstra's Senate is \emph{not} involved in is determining
faculty, staff, or student workplace conditions and compensation. Those
are the domain of Hofstra's collective bargaining units and unions. For
faculty, Hofstra's chapter of the American Association of University
Professors negotiates agreements that are codified in the current
\href{https://aaup-hofstra.org}{Collective Bargaining Agreement},
available on the AAUP chapter website.

In practice, this distinction between the appropriate domain of the
Senate and the appropriate domain of collective bargaining can be blurry
because there are Faculty Policy Series documents on topics like ``Work
Above Base Load'' and ``Outside Employment for Faculty.'' However, AAUP
and administration have negotiated that if there are any conflicts
between the FPS and the CBA, the CBA ``will control''
(\href{https://aaup-hofstra.org}{CBA} 3.2). So, for better or worse, the
CBA always has precedence.

Note also that, separately, Hofstra University's Office of Community
Standards (within the larger, administrative Division of Student
Enrollment, Engagement, and Success) produces the
\href{https://sites.google.com/hofstra.edu/guide-to-pride/home}{\emph{Guide
to Pride}} for students. It focuses on non-academic community standards
but but also pulls in academic policies from the FPS.

Hofstra also has a variety of other, non-academic policies like those
listed \href{https://www.hofstra.edu/about/policies.html}{here},
including safety and security plans, record-retention policy, and the
like. Many of these are beyond domain of the Senate, though in certain
cases where they impinge on academics, it could be appropriate for the
Senate to weigh in on them. Also, for example, the Senate By-laws make
the Chemical Hygiene Plan the responsibility of the Special Committee on
Environmental Health and Safety.

\section{What is the Senate's main
workflow?}\label{what-is-the-senates-main-workflow}

The Senate's work is nearly all done by its committees and therefore by
the voting members of the committees. The committees review policies and
keep an eye out for issues. They draft policy to send to put before the
Senate.

Coordinating between the Senate's committees and the Senate itself is
the Executive Committee (SEC). The SEC refers items to committees, and
committees send items to the SEC that they hope will come before the
Senate. (The members of the SEC are the chairs of the Senate's standing
committees and the Provost, with the President of the University Senate
chairing, so the SEC normally communicates with standing committees
through their chairs.)

At Senate meetings, the Chair of the SEC (who also serves as the Senate
President) presents items the SEC has passed to the Senate for approval
(see FS VII A.5).

When items are passed by the Senate, they normally go to the full
faculty as either information items or action items.

\section{What happens to items passed by the
Senate?}\label{what-happens-to-items-passed-by-the-senate}

Action items passed by the Senate normally go to the full faculty for
its approval at one if its four annual working meetings (see FS IX).

Items passed by the full faculty are then sent, via intermediate review
by the Provost and the Office of General Counsel, to the University
President and Board of Trustees. Items passed by the Senate only become
policies when approved and signed by the University President.

The standard approval sequence for Senate proposals is therefore:
(subcommittee →) standing/special committee → Senate Executive Committee
→ University Senate → Faculty → legal → Provost → University President
(→ Board of Trustees).

However, the flow of passed motions is not always linear; items are
sometimes returned to previous stages, including all the way back to the
originating committees.

The University President and the Speaker of the Faculty normally notify
the Senate and full faculty when they receive notice that the University
President has signed something passed by the Senate and Full Faculty.

\section{Must all Senate items come from its
committees?}\label{must-all-senate-items-come-from-its-committees}

Though it is not the standard workflow for fully reviewing initiatives,
sometimes items are introduced at Senate or full faculty meetings as
motions (subject to guidelines in FS VII, FS X, and \emph{Robert's
Rules}). In other words, it's not \emph{required} that items coming
before the Senate have their origin in a committee. But because the
Senate isn't equipped to evaluate the full implications or complexities
of many proposals, new business introduced at Senate may often be
referred to the appropriate committee for analysis, or at least to the
Executive Committee.

But also, the Senate's rules specify that ``before a vote may be taken
on an item presented for action, senators must have had at least two
working days published notice'' (FS VII C.2.a). So, action items must be
circulated in advance. The Senate's Senior Support Specialist usually
finalizes and circulates the Senate's agenda on the Thursday before
Monday Senate meetings. So, items that need ``published notice'' need to
go to her before then. Ideally, they would also go to the Senate
Executive Committee, which sets the meeting agenda; it normally meets
one week before Senate meetings.

\section{What rules govern the
Senate?}\label{what-rules-govern-the-senate}

The University Senate is established and primarily governed by
\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/sites/default/files/2024-04/facultystatutes.pdf}{Faculty
Statute VII, ``The University Senate''}. A current copy of the Statutes
including this one is available on the
\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/senate/}{Senate website}.

The Senate's
\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/sites/default/files/2022-04/senatebylaws.pdf}{By-laws}
(thus titled) mostly concern its individual committees, though Section I
(``General'') lists a handful of broader rules.

Faculty Statute VII also stipulates that except in matters covered by
the Statute, the current edition of \emph{Robert's Rules of Order} shall
be considered binding. In practice, the Senate relaxes some requirements
like that speakers must stand up, but the meeting structure and
proceedings generally conform to the \emph{Rules}.

Of course, in the background, Hofstra's general policies, including
those in the
\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/senate/faculty-policy-series.html}{Faculty
Policy Series} related to community standards and professional conduct,
continue to apply, as do laws.

\section{What rules govern Senate
committees?}\label{what-rules-govern-senate-committees}

Senate committees are governed by the same rules as the Senate, but in
particular by the sections of the
\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/sites/default/files/2022-04/senatebylaws.pdf}{Senate
By-laws} establishing their committee. The By-laws set out the
membership and the mandate for each committee and sometimes other
guidance. Reading one's committee's brief By-laws carefully helps a lot
when the question arises, What are we doing here again?

Similarly, Senate committees are governed by \emph{Robert's Rules of
Order}. Some awkwardness in committee meetings and grumbling about rules
can be due to confusions about what \emph{Robert's Rules} involves. It
is widely overlooked that the \emph{Rules} acknowledges that in
committees ``some of the formality that is necessary in a large assembly
would hinder business'' (\emph{RRO} 49:21).

Specifically, in committee meetings, \emph{Robert's Rules} indicates:
``motions need not be seconded''; ``informal discussion of a subject is
permitted while no motion is pending''; ``when a proposal is perfectly
clear to all present, a vote can be taken without a motion's having been
introduced''; generally, ``a vote can be taken initially by a show of
hands''; and the chair ``may, without leaving the chair, speak in
informal discussions and in debate, and vote on all questions''
(\emph{RRO} 49:21). That is, the \emph{formal} guidelines for committees
are pretty casual. Confidently eschew excess formality.

Note that Hofstra Library has available ebooks of both
\href{https://hofstra.on.worldcat.org/oclc/1192561100}{\emph{Robert's
Rules of Order: Newly Revised}} and the very helpful, official
summary/overview version
\href{https://hofstra.on.worldcat.org/oclc/1192973323}{\emph{Robert's
Rules of Order: Newly Revised in Brief}}. (Also note that Hofstra
Professor of Mathematics Daniel Seabold is a co-author of both!) A
little familiarity with procedure can help one make things happen---not
only for committee chairs but also for participants.

\section{Who is in the Senate?}\label{who-is-in-the-senate}

There are two categories of voting members of the Senate: elected and
ex-officio members.

Various constituencies get to elect senators to represent them on the
Senate: regular professors from each of the schools and then also
adjunct faculty as a unit. Some of these elections are managed by the
Senate through its Communications, Outreach, and Election Committee.
(See FS VII B.2.)

Other people have a role in the Senate because of their roles elsewhere.
Certain administrators, the Speaker and Vice Speaker of the Faculty, the
Chair of the Chairs' Caucus, and the student who is President of the
Student Government Association are, by virtue of serving in their roles,
full voting members of the Senate. These are the ex-officio members.
(See FS VII B.1.)

\section{What are senators-at-large?}\label{what-are-senators-at-large}

The Senate appoints to Senate committees others who are \emph{not}
voting members of the Senate. These appointed participants are called
``senators-at-large'' (styled thus in the Statute), and they can be
faculty, administration, chairpersons, or staff. Senators-at-large serve
for two year terms, with renewal possibilities. The purpose of having
this role is that the Senate have well-populated committees that are
capable of doing the main work of the Senate without making the Senate
itself, as a deliberative body, huge and unwieldy. Senators-at-large may
participate in the deliberations of the Senate, even though they only
vote in committee. (See FS VII B.3.) They play a crucial role in the
productivity of the Senate's committees.

\section{Who is on Senate committees, and in what
capacities?}\label{who-is-on-senate-committees-and-in-what-capacities}

The membership of each Senate committee is specified by its page in the
\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/sites/default/files/2022-04/senatebylaws.pdf}{Senate
By-laws}, and the current members of each committee are listed on the
Senate website, on the
\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/senate/committees-subcommittees.html}{committees
page}.

It is important to recognize, as a committee participant, that not
everyone who attends committee meetings attends in the same capacity or
has the same responsibilities there. Committees include elected senators
and appointed senators-at-large, and they are responsible for doing the
work of the committee. The senators and senators-at-large also elect one
of their members to be committee's chair. The committee sections of the
By-laws also specify an advisor for many of the committees who is
usually a member of the Provost's office. And many committees have
regular guests who also attend in an advisory capacity, people like the
Registrar or the Dean of Graduate Admissions.

\section{What do committee chairs
do?}\label{what-do-committee-chairs-do}

Each committee's chair is responsible for working with the Senate's
Senior Support Specialist to schedule the committee's meetings
---~ideally at a time when as many members as possible can attend. The
chair sets and circulates the agenda for each meeting, keep records on
each meeting in the form of minutes, and generally coordinates the work
of the committee.

Each chair of a standing committee of the Senate (UAAC, GAAC, FAC, P\&B,
and SAC) also automatically becomes a member of the Senate Executive
Committee (SEC), which coordinates the Senate's work. Besides these
chairs, the SEC includes the Senate President, who chairs it, and the
Provost (or their designate).

As the SEC normally meets once a month during the academic year, the
standing committee chairs regularly report on their committee's work to
the SEC.

The chairs of Senate subcommittees (ARC, CoL, CEP, CERT) normally report
on behalf of their committees to the parent committees at least once
each semester. When it's useful, they may coordinate with the Senate
President about reporting to the full Senate.

The chairs of Senate special committees (COEC, SCAP, SCAC, SCEHS)
Special Committees normally report in writing to the Senate Executive
Committee once a semester and may be asked by the Senate Executive
Committee to report on specific items directly to the Senate. (SCG
normally works with the chair of FAC.)

\section{When does the Senate meet?}\label{when-does-the-senate-meet}

The Senate normally meets once a month during the academic year,
typically on Monday afternoons at 1 PM. The Senate may also have special
meetings, though that hasn't happened in recent memory. (See FS VII
C.2.) The current year's meeting schedule is available through the
\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/senate/}{Senate website}. Invitees will
receive Outlook calendar invitations well in advance, by email, from the
Senate's Senior Support Specialist Caroline Schreiner.

\section{Who may attend Senate
meetings?}\label{who-may-attend-senate-meetings}

Elected, ex officio senators, and senators-at-large are invited to
attend. Members of the faculty, administration, chairpersons, students,
and staff may also observe meetings of the Senate. These others may,
upon invitation of the Senate President, and with the consent of the
body, participate in its deliberations, but they may not vote. (See FS
VII C.2.d.) The Senate has a quorum only when at least half its
\emph{elected} members are present (FS VII C.2.c).

\section{Who coordinates the Senate?}\label{who-coordinates-the-senate}

Most of the logistical work required to operate the Senate is performed
by the Senate's Senior Support Specialist. She sends the invitations,
organizes the agendas, puts out the name placards, coordinates the Zoom
during meetings, and lots else. Currently the Senate's Senior Support
Specialist is Caroline Schreiner
(\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/senate/}{contact information}).

The President of the University Senate runs it. The Senate president is
a faculty member who is an elected senator subsequently elected by the
Senate to be its president (FS VII C.1.a). The President of the Senate
also chairs the Senate's Executive Committee. Until 2023, the University
Provost presided over the Senate, while the SEC was chaired by a faculty
member. Currently the Senate President is Christopher (Chris) Eliot
(\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/faculty-staff/faculty-profile.html?id=415}{contact
information}).

\section{How can elected senators communicate with their
constituents?}\label{how-can-elected-senators-communicate-with-their-constituents}

The Senate operates ``course'' sites on Hofstra's Canvas learning
management system for each of the faculty units that elect senators.
These sites aim to facilitate democratic engagement with the Senate and
raise awareness of Senate initiatives. Ideally, senators will share key
items of Senate business and news with constituents. Ideally
constituents will be reminded of who their senators are and think of
senators as potential recipients for items of concern and promising
ideas.

Senators are made ``teachers'' in of these Canvas courses, and all the
faculty in the unit are invited to the ``student'' role. This allows
senators to send announcements to their constituents by email. They can
open these announcements for constituent comments, and constituents can
reply by email.

The membership of these sites should be refreshed every year.
Participants must opt in on Canvas to participate, and they must also
have ``receive announcements as emails'' turned on in their Canvas
settings to receive emails.

For non-faculty student, staff, and administrative senators,
communication channels vary by group. (Senators should coordinate with
the Senate President and Senior Support Specialist if they need help.)

\section{What is ``shared
governance''?}\label{what-is-shared-governance}

We sometimes refer to the ecosystem of activities, bodies, and
procedures around the University Senate as Hofstra's ``shared
governance'' apparatus. The term derives from principles developed in
the 1960s concerning the governance of academic institutions.

\href{https://www.aaup.org/reports-publications/aaup-policies-reports/topical-reports/statement-government-colleges-and}{A
statement of core principles} was written and adopted in 1966 the
American Association of University Professors (the national
organization, not Hofstra's union), the American Council on Education,
and the Association of Governing Boards of Universities and Colleges.
The statement sets out the areas of responsibility of interdependent
parts of the university, including the Board, Faculty, President, et
al., highlighting the importance of communication among parties. The
statement mentions the idea of ``a faculty-elected senate or council for
larger divisions or the institution as a whole'' as part of laying out
ideals for faculty participation in institutional governance, in
communication and collaboration with other parties.

Hofstra's senate is faculty-convened (FS VII A.1), and faculty members
structurally have a majority. But ours is not a ``faculty senate,'' in
that administrators, students, and staff also participate and vote.

One might think of Hofstra's shared governance apparatus as including at
least the Senate and its committees, full faculty meetings, the process
of transmitting resolutions between the faculty and the University
President and Board of Trustees, and consultation between the Faculty
Leadership Group and the University President and Provost.

\section{What is the Faculty Leadership
Group?}\label{what-is-the-faculty-leadership-group}

In 2013 a
\href{https://www.hofstra.edu/pdf/faculty/senate/senate_resolution_informational_meetings.pdf}{resolution}
was passed specifying that ``the {[}University{]} President shall meet
regularly (preferably at the beginning and the end of the fall and
spring semesters,) with the Speaker of the Faculty, the Chair of the
Senate Executive Committee, the Chair of the Chairs' Caucus and when
appropriate, other shared governance leadership, to provide
informational updates on developments concerning University strategies
and policies.''

Then in 2020 that small group of elected faculty leaders plus the AAUP
chapter president began meeting regularly with the Provost to address
the COVID crisis situation, and they have continued to meet. This
``FLG'' also meets with the Provost at least twice each semester to
discuss concerns, issues, ideas, and the like. Sometimes issues raised
in this forum get referred to Senate committees, just as others are
referred to appropriate administrators.

\end{document}
